JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Presidential candidates set
their sights on
Wisconsin. Ted Cruz gets a
critical endorsement,
while Bernie Sanders aims to
continue his
winning streak.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: Iraqi
Christians flee in staggering
numbers, as
ISIS' grip tightens, but a small
militia group
is planning to fight back.
SAFAA KHAMRO, Nineveh Plains
Forces (through
translator): Now we have only
one unit. We
need the help of the Kurds. We
have to increase
our numbers. If we have enough
forces, we
can protect the Christians in
this Nineveh
area.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And from group
homes to dorm
rooms: how one foster care
student beats the
odds and wants to help others do
the same.
JAMES TURNER, Former Foster
Youth: These kids
will be driven because they want
to make a
name for themselves. You know,
foster care
and the group homes and foster
homes are gold
mines for our nation.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: A crucial
endorsement, a criminal
charge, a critical contest, it
was all the
stuff of another long and
sometimes strange
day in the presidential campaign
of 2016.
All five major presidential
candidates descended
on Wisconsin today, the site of
the primary
season's next big contest.
Governor Scott
Walker, who briefly sought the
Republican
nomination himself last year,
delivered his
in-demand endorsement to one of
the men attempting
to knock off front-runner Donald
Trump.
GOV. SCOTT WALKER (R),
Wisconsin: I just really
decided, after all these years
of the Obama-Clinton
failures, that it's time that we
elect a strong
new leader. And I have chosen to
endorse Ted
Cruz. Ted Cruz is the
best-positioned by far
to both win the nomination of
the Republican
Party and to then go on and
defeat Hillary
Clinton in the fall this year.
GWEN IFILL: Cruz, in turn,
launched another
round of criticism at Trump,
this time pegged
to news that Trump campaign
manager Corey
Lewandowski was charged today
with assaulting
a reporter after a press
conference earlier
this month.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
When you have a campaign that is
built on
personal insults, on attacks,
and now physical
violence, that has no place in a
political
campaign and has no place in our
democracy.
And I think it is a really
unfortunate development,
but I do think it helps clarify
for the voters
what the Trump campaign is all
about.
GWEN IFILL: Trump's campaign
maintained that
Lewandowski is absolutely
innocent of this
charge and denied that a tape
released by
the Jupiter, Florida, Police
Department showed
him grabbing reporter Michelle
Fields.
Later in the day, on the way to
a town hall
in House Speaker Paul Ryan's
hometown of Janesville,
Trump responded to questions
about the charges.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
If you look at her, my look and
according
to a lot of people, she's
grabbing at me,
and he's acting as an
intermediary and trying
to block her from doing that.
The news conference was over. It
was done.
It was finished, and she was
running up and
grabbing and asking questions.
And she wasn't
supposed to be doing that.
GWEN IFILL: Recent Wisconsin
polling shows
Trump, Cruz and Ohio Governor
John Kasich
in a statistical tie. Kasich,
who held a town
hall in Waukesha this afternoon,
says he is
the strongest candidate for the
fall.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm the only one that
consistently beats Hillary
Clinton. Nobody else
consistently beats her.
I beat her by 11 points in the
last poll.
So, that's probably going to
matter: Who is
it that can win? I think that's
why we're
having a primaries.
GWEN IFILL: Democrats Hillary
Clinton and
Bernie Sanders are also in a
tight race. Clinton
focused today on gun violence
prevention in
Milwaukee, a city that has seen
increasing
rates of gun deaths.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
This needs to be a voting issue,
not number
20 on the list, but number one
the list, especially
in zip codes like this one.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Every
child deserves
to have a healthy, happy life,
regardless
of the zip code he or she lives
in. And so
let's be committed to doing
everything we
can, in our own ways, to end
this epidemic.
GWEN IFILL: In Appleton,
Wisconsin, Sanders'
increasingly sharp criticism of
Clinton escalated
again today, as he seeks to
paint her as out
of touch.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm not wasting my time going to
rich people's
homes begging them for their
campaign contributions.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: I would
rather be here
with you in Appleton than
begging billionaires
for their money.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: And this is
one of the
real differences of opinion that
Secretary
Clinton and I have. It's how we
have chosen
to raise the money we need to
run our campaigns.
GWEN IFILL: With 42 Republican
and 86 Democratic
delegates up for grabs, the
candidates plan
to blanket the state between now
and next
Tuesday.
We will begin a series of
discussions on key
issues in the presidential race
later in the
program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: U.S.
officials ordered families of
American diplomats
and military personnel to leave
parts of Turkey.
The order covers the U.S.
Consulate in Adana,
plus Incirlik Air Base, and two
military sites
in Western cities.
In Washington, Pentagon
spokesman Peter Cook
cited ongoing security concerns,
without giving
details.
PETER COOK, Pentagon Press
Secretary: This
was a decision made out of an
abundance of
caution, given the overall
picture, the security
threats that -- that we looked
at in the region.
There's no specific threat that
triggered
this, but a broader decision
based on what
we have seen in the region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Officials also
restricted official
travel in Turkey, and updated an
existing
warning on travel in general.
GWEN IFILL: In Pakistan,
authorities report
they're holding more than 200
suspects in
the wake of Sunday's suicide
bombing in Lahore.
They say they rounded up, and
then released,
5,000 others. A Taliban faction
claimed responsibility
for the attack aimed at
Christians celebrating
Easter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An Egyptian man
hijacked a
jetliner on a domestic flight
today and forced
it to fly to Cyprus. Over the
next hours,
he let most of the passengers
go, and then
finally gave himself up.
Diana Magnay of Independent
Television News
has our report.
DIANA MAGNAY: EgyptAir Flight
181, eight hostages
left on board eight hours into
this crisis.
Three men raced down the steps,
and Cypriot
security forces run toward the
plane.
Then this remarkable image: One
man scrambles
from the cockpit window and
swings down the
side of the aircraft in what
looks like a
practiced move. Then, moments
later, it's
over. The man thought to be the
hijacker stumbles
almost as he leaves the plane,
then walks
very casually towards waiting
security forces.
He's been named as Egyptian
national Seif
Eldin Mustafa, pictured here in
a bizarre
selfie with a British passenger
thought to
be from Aberdeen. In this photo,
the belt
he claimed was packed with
explosives is on
clear display. It was later
found to be fake,
just a collection of mobile
phone covers.
And Cyprus' president didn't
seem too worried
either, making light of earlier
media reports
that the hijacker had asked to
see his Cypriot
ex-wife. "Isn't everything
always about a
woman?" he replied.
But that this man could make it
through security
and divert a major airliner
without even a
weapon is clearly no laughing
matter, particularly
not for Egypt five months after
the downing
of the Russian flight in Sinai,
with major
concerns over airport security
still overshadowing
its tourism industry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Egyptian
authorities said eight
Americans were among the
foreigners on board
the flight.
GWEN IFILL: The United Nations
Children's
Agency warned today that more
than 300,000
children in Yemen face
malnutrition and famine.
UNICEF also said all sides in
the year-old
war have forced children to
fight as soldiers.
And it said millions of Yemenis
lack access
to water and health care.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the White
House announced a new effort to
stop the epidemic
of addiction to opioid
painkillers and heroin.
President Obama attended a
summit on the problem
in Atlanta. He said he wants to
double the
number of addicts who get
medication for their
problem.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The most important thing we can
do is to reduce
demand for drugs. And the only
way that we
reduce demand is if we're
providing treatment
and thinking about this as a
public health
problem, and not just a criminal
problem.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, 60
medical schools
announced greater focus on
limiting the use
of opioid painkillers.
GWEN IFILL: There's a new twist
in the battle
over a transgender law in North
Carolina which
bars local governments from
allowing transgender
bathrooms and other
accommodations.
State Attorney General Roy
Cooper, a Democrat,
announced today he won't defend
the statute
in court. He called it a
national embarrassment.
Republican Governor Pat McCrory
signed the
law last week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Illinois
Republican Mark Kirk
met today with Supreme Court
nominee Merrick
Garland, the first GOP senator
to do so. He
praised the judge and criticized
colleagues
who've refused to meet with him
or to hold
confirmation hearings.
SEN. MARK KIRK (R), Illinois: I
think when
you just say I'm not going to
meet him at
all, that's too closed-minded.
We need for
rational, adult, open-minded
consideration
of the constitutional process,
which Judge
Garland is a part of.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kirk is facing a
tough Senate
reelection fight in a
Democratic-leaning state.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street,
stocks rallied
after Federal Reserve Chair
Janet Yellen reaffirmed
a go-slow approach on interest
rates. The
Dow Jones industrial average
gained more than
97 points to close at 17633. The
Nasdaq rose
nearly 80 points, and the S&P
500 added 18.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And actress Patty
Duke died
today of an intestinal
infection. As a teenager,
Duke won an Oscar as Helen
Keller in the 1962
film "The Miracle Worker." And
in the mid-1960s,
she played identical twins in
"The Patty Duke
Show" on TV. Later, she became
an advocate
for mental health. Patty Duke
was 69 years
old.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
the Supreme Court's first major
split decision
since Justice Scalia's death;
the DOJ cracks
an iPhone and reignites privacy
concerns;
facing ISIS, Iraqi Christians
must decide
to flee or fight; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
the Supreme
Court, where today's 4-4 split
was an unlikely
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
the Supreme
Court, where today's 4-4 split
was an unlikely
win for labor unions, and a
stark example
of the impact of Justice
Scalia's death.
For more on today's highly
anticipated decision,
and the new dynamics of the
divided court,
we are joined by Marcia Coyle,
chief Washington
correspondent for "The National
Law Journal."
So, welcome back, Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Actually, two
interesting developments
at the court today, but let's
start with that
labor union case first.
Remind us of the -- what the
arguments were
on each side. And this took
place when Justice
Scalia was still alive.
MARCIA COYLE: That's correct.
The arguments were heard earlier
this year.
The case was brought by a group
of California
public schoolteachers who were
not members
of the public employee union in
California.
They claimed that having to pay
what are called
agency fees or fair share fees
to the union
that actually is required by law
to represent
all of the public school
teachers violated
the teachers' First Amendment
speech and association
rights.
During the oral argument, Judy,
it appeared
that the court was going to rule
for the teachers.
It looked like the decision
might well have
been 5-4, with the five
conservative justices
in the majority and needing
Justice Scalia
to make that majority.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, today, we
learned that
the court is divided. The eight
justices on
the court are divided, one-line
statement.
MARCIA COYLE: A very common way
they handle
4-4 ties or splits. It's called
a per curiam
decision, an unsigned decision
in which the
court simply states that the
decision below
is affirmed by an equally
divided court. We
don't know who voted how.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this means
what?
MARCIA COYLE: It means that
agency shop fees
are constitutional in this
country under a
40-year-old Supreme Court
decision.
It doesn't mean the end of the
issue. There
are other challenges pending in
the lower
courts, so it may be a temporary
victory for
the union.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Marcia, can
we presume,
as long as there is not a ninth
justice who
is confirmed and sitting on the
court, that
there could very well be more
4-4, evenly
split decisions?
MARCIA COYLE: I think so, Judy.
We never know for sure, but I
think the second
thing that happened today is an
example of
how the court is struggling to
resolve some
of these very difficult
high-profile issues
it has before it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is -- we
learned that
the court is asking for another
briefing on
this Affordable Care Act
contraceptive case
that it had heard recently.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right.
This was a challenge brought by
a number of
religious nonprofits that claim
that notifying
the government that they object
to contraceptive
health insurance for their
employees, because
it requires them to notify the
government
of who their insurer is, makes
them complicit
in providing the insurance, a
violation of
their religious beliefs.
The court's order today really
is -- kind
of reflects the arguments we
heard last week,
in which you had several
justices, the chief
justice, Justices Kennedy and
Alito, sort
of accepting the charge that the
government
is hijacking the religious
nonprofit's insurance
plans, and the more liberal
justices accepting
the government's argument, there
is no hijacking,
there's probably no
accommodation that would
be acceptable to these
nonprofits.
So, the court has asked both
sides to suggest
alternatives that wouldn't
involve the religious
nonprofits in making any kind of
notification
to the government, but still
providing the
insurance through the insurance
plan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, quickly, it
looks like
they're looking for some middle
ground.
MARCIA COYLE: It does.
The court does in the like to
divide 4-4,
because it doesn't resolve the
question. And
in this case, it would leave the
law uneven
throughout the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The eight-member
court working
its way through these cases.
MARCIA COYLE: Definitely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia Coyle,
thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: A pitched battle
between the Obama
Justice Department and one of
the world's
biggest tech companies appeared
to end abruptly
this week, when the government
decided to
drop its insistence that Apple
crack the code
for an iPhone used in the San
Bernardino shootings.
Apple had refused, insisting
such cooperation
would constitute a major breach
of privacy.
The impending standoff ended
yesterday when
the government announced it had
been able
to crack the phone after all,
without Apple's
help.
But questions remain.
For that, we turn to Devlin
Barrett, who covers
the Justice Department for The
Wall Street
Journal, and Fred Kaplan, a
columnist with
Slate. He's the author of "The
Dark Territory:
The Secret History of Cyber
War."
Devlin, starting with you, did
one or the
other of the parties in this
case back away,
just back up?
DEVLIN BARRETT, The Wall Street
Journal: The
government backed away. The
government said
-- but it also got what it
wanted, in a sense,
because it got into the phone it
had been
trying to get into for months.
I think what you saw happen was
that the government
spent two months saying it can't
get into
this phone without Apple, and
then at the
last minute, essentially, it
said, actually,
someone has just come to us and
told us that
we can get into it without
Apple, and that's
what happened.
GWEN IFILL: So, Fred Kaplan, the
obvious question
for so many of us is, who broke
into the phone
for them, and how did they find
them, and
had they -- would they have been
able to find
them before without all of this
legal mishmash?
FRED KAPLAN, Slate: Well, it
seems to be an
Israeli cyber-security firm
called Cellebrite,
which consists mainly of retired
professionals
from the -- an outfit called
Unit 822, which
is a -- the cyber-warfare branch
of the Israeli
intelligence agency, sort of the
Israeli NSA.
You can imagine. Here's the FBI
saying, we
can't break into this phone.
Here's Apple
saying, we don't want anybody to
break into
this phone. This is the most
secure phone
out there. You have got
hundreds, maybe thousands
of hackers around the world who
look at this
and say, hmm, let me give this a
try.
And, you know, the law that the
FBI was invoking
to get Apple to open it
themselves, which
is a 1789 law called the All
Writs Act, states
that if somebody else can do it,
if you can
find some way to do it without
demanding that
a company like Apple do it, then
you have
to drop your suit.
And that's why the FBI withdrew.
They had
to. They really didn't want to.
They thought
that they had a good case here
and were ultimately
trying to test a new legal
principle to accommodate
for this new stronger era of
encryption.
GWEN IFILL: Well, Devlin, let's
pick up on
that, because if indeed there is
another way
the hack into phones like this,
Apple's argument
had been there's a slippery
slope here, and
if we agree to do this, then
everybody -- then
we will have to do it in the
future. Is the
slippery slope still in place?
DEVLIN BARRETT: The legal
argument is still
unresolved, and the battle will
go on. The
war will go on even if the
battle ends on
this phone has ended.
So, there is in -- from a
technologist's point
of view, a real issue of, if you
do what the
government wants, there will
always be more
vulnerabilities to systems than
technologists
would like to see.
The government's argument is,
you shouldn't
have devices that are
warrant-proof, that
even with a judge's order, we
can't -- meaning
the government, can't get into
and can't look
at and can't see if there is
evidence of a
crime in those devices.
GWEN IFILL: But they didn't have
the -- they
didn't -- they weren't able to
set that legal
precedent that they were
seeking, if that's
true.
DEVLIN BARRETT: No, but there's
ever reason
to expect that there will be
another phone
with a similar issue very soon.
There's already a bunch of other
phones on
lesser cases that are in dispute
right now.
Everyone expects that this fight
will only
continue.
GWEN IFILL: So, let's talk about
other cases,
Fred Kaplan.
There is also -- there is a drug
case in Brooklyn
where we're expecting in a
couple weeks, if
not sooner, to hear about
whether the government
can get access to that phone.
FRED KAPLAN: Yes. There are
several drug cases
like that.
You know, local law enforcement
agencies,
they don't know how to hack into
these phones.
The FBI alone doesn't know how.
If this phone
had -- if there were some reason
to believe
that this phone had truly urgent
material
on it that the government had to
get hold
of for national security
purpose, the FBI
could have put in a request for
technical
assistance to the National
Security Agency,
which would have been able to
open up this
phone.
Things like that have happened
before. The
fact that the FBI didn't do this
suggests
to me that the issue wasn't the
phone, but
they were trying to create a new
legal precedent.
GWEN IFILL: What do you think
about that,
Devlin Barrett?
DEVLIN BARRETT: The FBI has
denied that. The
FBI has denied that the
government had any
answers on this.
Now, I think Fred and a lot of
other people
are incredibly skeptical of that
explanation.
I think one of the big tests of
this case
has been the FBI's credibility,
because some
of what they said has been
contradicted by
other things that they have
said. So it will
be interesting to see going
forward.
You know, Washington and Silicon
Valley have
a very tense relationship right
now.
GWEN IFILL: Well, what about...
DEVLIN BARRETT: It will be
interesting to
see how this affects that
relationship. It
worsens it, probably.
GWEN IFILL: What about Apple's
credibility?
This is one of these questions
where it seems
-- so, there was a real argument
to be made
that Apple was being difficult.
DEVLIN BARRETT: Well, right.
And there's plenty of folks in
government
who believe that what Apple is
arguing is
ultimately a bad thing for
society. You know,
there are -- as Fred said, there
are outstanding
cases all over the country where
prosecutors
and detectives can't get into
phones.
There are plenty of people who
say, that's
not a good outcome. There should
be a better
solution to this. Do you really
want a situation
where, if someone you love is
murdered and
the evidence of that crime may
be on the victim's
phone, that you can't even get
into the victim's
phone? That's the argument
against what Apple
has been saying.
GWEN IFILL: Fred Kaplan, what --
if this were
a smaller company, not the
all-powerful Apple,
a smaller tech company with a
similar request
being made, do you think that
it's possible
that it would have had the same
outcome?
FRED KAPLAN: Well, look, you
know, in previous
cases, Apple has agreed to
unlock phones about
70 times, usually under FISA
court orders.
In this instance, I'm told that
it could have
quietly done something to give
the FBI the
information that wouldn't have
opened up all
of their phones to
vulnerabilities, that wouldn't
have required them to write a
whole new operating
system. I'm not sure of that.
But the thing is, there has been
an almost-century-long
history of telecoms cooperating
with intelligence
agencies, going back to Western
Union, AT&T
and continuing into the Internet
age today.
Apple is a bit more libertarian
in its attitudes
than some of the other
companies.
The FBI was trying to sustain
this arrangement
where companies do cooperate.
Apple is trying
to create a new road to go out
on. I think
you're right that this conflict
is not over.
There will be another case.
At some point, the courts are
going to have
to decide about this. All of
these cases are
based on laws that were written
long before
the age of cell phones and
digital technology.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
FRED KAPLAN: It will be very
interesting to
see how the law ends up on this.
There's no
-- everything is ambiguous.
GWEN IFILL: Well, and perhaps
Congress is
going to end up weighing in as
well.
Fred Kaplan, Devlin Barrett,
thank you both
very much.
DEVLIN BARRETT: Thank you.
FRED KAPLAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
where candidates
stand on immigration and how
it's impacting
voters; a young man in foster
care tries to
beat the odds; and how race
plays into the
heroin crisis.
But first: Iraq's Christians
have fled the
country in startling numbers
since the U.S.
invasion in 2003. That exodus
has been accelerated
by the ISIS onslaught over the
last two years.
Now some are standing their
ground to fight
back.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports
from Irbil and the Nineveh Plain
in Northern
Iraq.
JANE FERGUSON: Iraqi Christians
celebrate
Easter's Holy Week, a time of
rebirth, hope,
salvation. But many here see
little hope in
their ancestral lands. They have
fled ISIS'
grip for the nearby safety of
Irbil city,
and they have no idea if they
can ever go
home.
Father Douglas Bazi has worked
to raise awareness
around the world of the plight
of Iraq's Christians.
Yet even he understands why most
choose to
leave a nation they struggle to
feel a part
of.
FATHER DOUGLAS BAZI, Iraq: The
bigger problem
here is when the Christians
feeling that we
are not belong to this land
again -- anymore.
Without -- with this feeling, I
am not feeling
that I belong to Iraq. So, why I
am here?
Why should I be target every
time?
And don't -- please, don't blame
my people
when they, because always they
say, oh, it's
a shame, the Middle East without
-- without
Christians. It's really a shame.
The Christians,
they are leaving.
So, why you put shame on my
people? Why not
put shame to those actually
force people to
leave?
JANE FERGUSON: The number of
Christians in
the Middle East has fallen from
14 percent
of the population in 1910 to 4
percent in
2010. Before 2003, there were
around 1.5 million
Christians in Iraq. Now it is
believed less
than 200,000 remain.
And many of those have been
displaced from
their villages by the Islamic
State. These
Christians fled their town as
ISIS fighters
approached, losing everything
they have ever
known in just a few terrifying
hours.
Now they live in Father Douglas'
church yard.
They cannot go home, but they
have nowhere
else to go. Compared to many
refugees in this
war, they are lucky. The global
Christian
community is supporting them,
and some have
been offered new lives in
Europe.
But Hekmat Peter doesn't just
want to go home.
He wants to go back in time, to
when neighbors
lived in harmony.
HEKMAT PETER, Iraq (through
translator): We
don't want a place for Christian
people only,
but like we used to live. Our
town was surrounded
by 30 villages of Muslims. So we
want to live
together in peace, like we did
for many years.
JANE FERGUSON: Fighting back
will not solve
the problem either, says Father
Douglas. He
believes resolutely that
Christians should
never take up arms against their
attackers.
FATHER DOUGLAS BAZI: We don't
believe in war
at all. We don't believe that
the rights should
be taken by weapon. And,
actually, as a Christian,
we don't have militia belong to
the Christian.
So, as a Christian, we don't
have a militia.
Those people, if they want to go
to the military
and to serve there and be paid,
this is their
choice. We are never giving a
blessing to
war.
JANE FERGUSON: These men
disagree. They are
Christians who have come
together into a small
band of soldiers, coached by
Americans and
local Kurdish fighters called
the Peshmerga.
They named themselves the
Nineveh Plains Forces,
after this area north of Mosul
where many
Christian villages were
attacked. With less
than 300 men fighting, their
presence here
is almost entirely symbolic. But
their commander
believes they can help their
people.
SAFAA KHAMRO, Nineveh Plains
Forces (through
translator): Now we have only
one unit. We
need the help of the Kurds. We
have to increase
our numbers. If we have enough
forces, we
can protect the Christians in
this Nineveh
area.
JANE FERGUSON: Commanders here
say these soldiers
don't have enough heavy weaponry
to be stationed
at the front line permanently.
Instead, they
wait here about a mile from the
front line.
And when there is an attack by
ISIS, they
move there quickly to back up
Peshmerga forces.
For these soldiers, the fight is
very personal.
This 23-year-old volunteer calls
himself George.
His whole family fled their
village, and he
says ISIS fighters are now
living in his home.
And how does it feel to have
ISIS living in
your house?
GEORGE, Nineveh Plains Forces:
It's a bad
feeling, so aggravated, so
angry, so mad.
So, since they started here and
created this
force, I hear about it, and I
came and volunteered
to defend, to do everything. I
really want
to kill some of them. So, it's
like an angry
inside of me, angry what they
did to us.
JANE FERGUSON: He thinks there
is too much
bad blood here for things to be
the same again.
If Da'esh, or ISIS, are defeated
and they
are pushed out of Mosul, is it
going to be
difficult for Christian
communities here to
live side by side with their
neighbors?
GEORGE: Yes, I think it's going
to be hard
and difficult.
JANE FERGUSON: George blames his
Muslim neighbors
for not standing up to ISIS.
GEORGE: They saw a lot of, like,
bad things,
and killing, kidnapping. So, I
don't think
so. I don't think they can
communicate with
them again.
JANE FERGUSON: The men practice
house searches
amongst the remnants of the very
communities
they hope to protect.
This Christian town emptied out
in August
2014 when ISIS rushed in here
and took over.
Soon after, the Kurdish
Peshmerga forces pushed
them out. But the 1,000 or so
Christian families
who lived here never came back.
The town now
lies abandoned.
Some houses are being used to
house Peshmerga
and Christian forces. And the
front line is
about one mile in that
direction. That's where
ISIS positions are. It's now
eerily silent
here, except for some warplanes
that fly overhead.
A couple of miles away, where
the Nineveh
Plains meet mountains, the Saint
Hormuzd Monastery
retains the defensive position
it has kept
for over 1,500 years. From its
peaceful courtyard,
the front line of fighting can
be seen in
the distance.
But it's a crumbling relic of
Christianity,
empty of the vibrant people it
once was built
to serve, looking out over a
land many in
its community feel is slipping
away from them.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Northern Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back to this
country and the
2016 presidential race.
We want to take a closer look at
significant
issues shaping the campaigns,
tonight, immigration.
The plans for reform range from
a tall border
wall funded by Mexico to a path
to citizenship
for the 11 million undocumented
immigrants
living here now.
We dig into the issue and to the
role of Latino
voters with Mark Krikorian. He's
executive
director of the Center for
Immigration Studies,
and the author of the book "The
New Case Against
Immigration, Both Legal and
Illegal." Frank
Sharry, he's founder of the
immigration reform
group America's Voice. And
Brittney Parker,
she's a senior officer at the
Commonwealth
Foundation. It's a nonpartisan,
nonprofit
think tank that promotes free
market ideas.
And we welcome all three of you
to the "NewsHour."
Mark Krikorian, let me start
with you first.
Let's talk about the Republican
candidates
for president. What are they
saying? How are
they differing? At this point,
it's -- you
have got Ted Cruz, Donald Trump
and John Kasich.
How do they differ on the
subject of immigration?
MARK KRIKORIAN, Executive
Director, Center
for Immigration Studies: There's
actually
a pretty wide range between
them.
Kasich is actually probably much
closer to
the Democratic candidates, wants
to amnesty
illegal immigrants and increase
immigration.
Ted Cruz is actually, in a
sense, kind of
in between, because Trump has
said in his
published platform he wants to
reduce immigration,
among other things.
I'm not sure he's read his own
platform, but
at least that's what it says in
print. Cruz
is kind of in the middle. He's
called for
no increases in immigration,
reforms in certain
programs, toughening of
enforcement. So, there
is actually a pretty entered
range, whereas,
on the Democratic side, the two
candidates
pretty much agree on everything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brittney Parker,
how do you
see the Republican candidates on
immigration?
BRITTNEY PARKER, Commonwealth
Foundation:
Well, the thing is that,
unfortunately for
Kasich, who is probably most in
line with
the majority of Republican
primary voters,
despite what Trump would say, is
not many
people know what Kasich's
immigration platform
is. He just doesn't capture the
headlines
the way that Cruz or Trump does.
Cruz, much more in between the
two candidates
-- I agree with Mark on that --
but increasingly
moving to more hard-line
immigration stance,
especially compared to where he
used to be
just a few years ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Frank
Sharry, as somebody
who is coming at this from the
other side
of the political spectrum, how
do you see
voters so far in these
Republican primaries
responding to these candidates?
FRANK SHARRY, Founder, America's
Voice: Look,
the animating issue in the
immigration debate
right now is what to do about 11
million undocumented
immigrants who live and work in
America.
Trump has gone far beyond
anything we have
seen, and by saying that he's
going to round
up and deport people within 18
to 24 months,
a remarkable thing. The wall
gets a lot of
attention, but the idea that we
would have
that kind of mass roundup of
people who are
settled in America, it would be
one of the
most outrageous human rights
violations in
the modern world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he's still
doing well in
the primaries. He's ahead in
delegates.
FRANK SHARRY: He's still doing
well.
So, let's remember Mitt Romney
had a hard-line
policy in 2012. It cost him
big-time with
Latino voters, arguably cost him
the election.
And that's why the RNC said, we
need a kinder,
gentler approach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Krikorian,
let me ask
you to put the shoe on the other
foot. Looking
at the Democratic primaries, how
do you see
the differences between Hillary
Clinton and
Bernie Sanders, and how do you
see that breaking...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK KRIKORIAN: Yes.
The interesting thing is, there
really isn't
any daylight between them.
Hillary was -- seems
to be moving farther and farther
to the left
on a variety of issues,
obviously, not just
immigration, to compete with
Sanders. And
they both have said in a recent
debate explicitly,
they said that there is no one
they would
deport who wasn't convicted of a
violent crime.
In other words, they have said
that every
illegal immigrant here and every
new illegal
immigrant would be allowed to
stay as long
as they're not convicted of a
violent crime.
That's really an extreme, very
extreme position.
And it's essentially the same
between the
two of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brittney Parker,
as a Puerto
Rican woman who follows these
issues very
closely, how do you see the
Democratic divide,
and how concerned are you for
the Republican
Party that it is not
representing the views
of those who believe the country
needs to
be more forgiving and more
understanding when
it comes to immigration?
BRITTNEY PARKER: Being part of
the Latino
community, immigration is a top
issue. Almost
everyone in the Hispanic
community knows someone
affected by immigration.
And part of the problem that
you're seeing
on the right isn't even the
hard-line stances,
which, let's be honest, we're
not going to
deport 12 million people. It's
the rhetoric.
It's the selling of outrage in
regards to
these issues.
It's a complete turnoff. It just
pushes away
-- people away before they can
even start
to have the conversation about
how to fix
the broken immigration system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Frank Sharry,
respond to that,
and also to what one often hears
about Democrats,
that they may be taking the
Latino, the Hispanic
vote for granted.
FRANK SHARRY: Yes, I'm actually
pleased.
I think Mark is right that both
Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders are really
leaning in,
and they're trying to show the
Latino community
that they're on their side, in
hopes of a
big turnout. And I do think
that, you know,
they're exploiting a Republican
lurch to the
right.
We have never seen the
difference between
the two parties so wide. And the
Latino vote
is going to be of consequence in
a number
of key swing states, Florida,
Colorado, Nevada,
North Carolina, New Mexico,
Virginia. Honestly,
this could be -- the fact that
the Republicans
have gone so far towards the
extreme on immigration
could really hurt them with a
critical population
that's going to help decide the
election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does that worry
you, Mark Krikorian?
MARK KRIKORIAN: Well, first of
all, I mean,
I'm personally Republican. My
organization
isn't. So, I mean, I'm looking
at this from
the outside.
And what Frank is talking about
could actually
happen. I mean, there's no
question that Donald
Trump's rhetoric, at the very
least, raises
hackles on the parts of a lot of
people.
But, you know, all the political
predictions
about this election have been
wrong up until
now. I think there's a real
possibility that
the Democratic candidates, in
their attempt
to pander to Hispanic voters, or
at least
to Hispanic activist
organizations, are actually
turning away a lot of their own
voters who
were otherwise predisposed to
vote for a Democrat.
And that's what you're seeing, a
lot of Trump
support coming from people who
are otherwise
Democrats. So, I think -- I
really -- I don't
think it's obvious what effect
immigration
is going to have. We're all
speculating on
this. And you're obviously
always speculating
until there is an election.
This is much more fluid and much
less predictable
than at any time in the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brittney Parker,
do you agree
with that?
BRITTNEY PARKER: I agree that
we're not sure
what is going to happen, what
exactly the
role immigration is going to
play in this
election.
But I would say that almost
every major poll
that's come out does show that
the majority
of Americans support -- do not
support deportation
of the 12 million, and support
some type of
immigration reform.
And, yes, about 40 percent of
Republican primary
voters are supporting Donald
Trump and his
espoused rhetoric on deportation
and lessening
legal immigration, but that
still leaves 60
percent of Republican primary
voters who are
not in agreement with his stance
and the general
electorate. That leaves
moderates, libertarians,
independents, Democrats, who
tend to disagree
with Donald Trump on this issue
of immigration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You just made the
point, Mark
Krikorian, that you are a
Republican personally.
That's not representative of
your organization.
But what does it mean for the
Republican Party
if Donald Trump were elected and
carried out
what he says he's going to do?
MARK KRIKORIAN: I don't know. We
will see.
First of all, he's not going to
be deporting
everybody. This is -- the
interesting thing
is, you know, when they take
these exit polls
about people supporting a path
to citizenship,
a lot of the people who are
answering yes
to that are also Trump's voters.
In other words, I think people
are misunderstanding
what this poll question about do
you support
a path to citizenship means. I
support a path
to citizenship for some portion
of illegal
immigrants, so I could be
answering yes.
The question is, what do we do
before that?
How do we make sure that, if we
do have an
amnesty, it's the last amnesty?
And that -- no
one trusts regular politicians
to legalize
illegal immigrants without
creating a new
problem in the future. And that
is what a
lot of Trump's appeal is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Frank Sharry,
what's the main
question for you going into this
election
when it comes to immigration?
FRANK SHARRY: Are Latinos going
to turn out?
Are Democrats and progressives
going to invest
in Latino turnout?
I think it could be a real
game-changer for
Democrats and progressives in
this election.
Will Donald Trump get the
nomination, and
what will he represent to
Latinos who are
deeply offended when he calls
hardworking
Mexicans criminals and drug
dealers and rapists,
when he says -- he threatens to
take citizenship
away from their kids who were
born here?
I think we're going to see a
referendum on
immigration, on race and
inclusion, where
Hispanic voters going to be
decisive in elections.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have
months to go
and much more to unfold about
this issue.
We thank you, all three, Frank
Sharry, Mark
Krikorian and Brittney Parker.
Thank you.
BRITTNEY PARKER: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Only 2 percent of
children living
in foster care will earn a
college degree
by the time they turn 25.
We have the story tonight of a
student in
Florida working to defy those
odds and to
change them for others as well.
The "NewsHour"'s April Brown has
our profile,
the second in a series of
stories on foster
care.
It's part of our weekly series
on education,
Making the Grade.
APRIL BROWN: Last year at his
high school
in Orlando, Florida, James
Turner was known
by many for his blazing speed in
the 400-meter
dash. He was dedicated and
driven, and several
college track coaches had taken
notice. But
what many didn't know was that
James was running
a far more difficult race off
the track.
JAMES TURNER, Former Foster
Youth: You know,
before 5, they said I had 17 --
I lived in
17 different foster homes.
APRIL BROWN: James Turner has
never really
had what most people take for
granted: what
they call in foster care a
forever family.
Placed in care at just 18 months
old, James
was separated from all three of
his siblings
by the time he was 5, and has
had little contact
with any of his family ever
since.
At 8, he almost was adopted by a
family he
loved that was moving to
Jamaica, but, at
the last minute, he decided he
couldn't leave
his school, his neighborhood and
his country.
It's a decision he still
regrets. James says
the next foster home was a
violent place.
JAMES TURNER: The dad of the
home, he beat
me a lot and his kids also and
other kids
that he took into the system.
And he said
-- his excuse was -- and I
remember he was
always telling us, "Well, my
foster mom did
it, so I'm going to do it to
you."
APRIL BROWN: In another foster
home, James
says the father set mousetraps
in front of
the refrigerator after he caught
the children
sneaking extra food.
JAMES TURNER: And I remember,
the guy, he
showed us with a carrot. He
said, if you come
out here at night and take food
from the refrigerator
again, this is what will happen
to your finger.
And we watched the carrot get
broken in half.
APRIL BROWN: By the age of 12,
James was mainly
living in group homes, something
that often
happens, according to Betsey
Bell, who runs
Orlando's Foundation for Foster
Children,
an organization that has helped
James since
high school.
BETSEY BELL, Foundation for
Foster Children:
As kids grow older, if they are
not adopted
out by age 9, then their chance
of being adopted
and being part of a forever
family are much
smaller. And so what we see,
though, is, at
that same time, when kids are
getting older,
they are in group homes, because
there is
just not enough foster homes.
APRIL BROWN: As he grew up,
James changed
group homes and schools several
times. But
he learned how to advocate for
himself and
for other kids in care.
BETSEY BELL: He was the big
brother. He was
the one that kids would go to,
that they knew
James would help them.
APRIL BROWN: However, James
found few adults
he could really trust.
JAMES TURNER: I find myself
always examining
people and observing things. I
think it scarred
me for the rest of my life,
because I cannot
-- I cannot go throughout a day
without having
to -- trying to figure somebody
out who is
directly involved in my life.
APRIL BROWN: That slowly began
to change when
James arrived at Orlando's Boone
High School.
He wanted to go out for track,
but didn't
have track shoes. The staff at
the Foundation
for Foster Children got him a
pair.
And then he met the school's
college counselor,
Weeze Cullen. He told her he
wanted to go
straight to Florida State
University after
graduation and earn a business
degree.
WEEZE CULLEN, College Counselor,
Boone High
School: I think it's much more
common for
students in the foster system to
be working
on just graduating high school.
APRIL BROWN: In fact, national
studies show
only about half of students in
foster care
in the U.S. graduate from high
school. Fewer
than one in 10 enroll in college
at all, fewer
still in four-year schools.
But James drove himself to beat
those odds,
and he and Cullen began
outlining a plan to
get him to FSU. However, some
unexpected hurdles
emerged, because it seemed few
case workers
were familiar with how to apply
for college
and financial aid.
WEEZE CULLEN: I think they were
unfamiliar
because they don't send students
to four-year
schools. And so I'm not sure
that that's something
they spend a lot of time doing
because it
just doesn't happen.
APRIL BROWN: But, for James, it
did happen.
JOHN THRASHER, President,
Florida State University:
I wanted to take this
opportunity to offer
my congratulations to James.
APRIL BROWN: And even university
president
John Thrasher wanted to
congratulate him.
MAN: Your sense of self really
is shaped by
powerful forces you may or may
not think about.
APRIL BROWN: Today, the
19-year-old recently
began his second semester and
says he wouldn't
have made it if not for Cullen.
JAMES TURNER: FSU, I thought,
was out of reach.
And she made it more reasonable,
and she made
it seem a lot more possible.
APRIL BROWN: James' tuition and
fees are paid
for by the state because he went
through Florida's
foster care system. He also was
admitted into
a program specifically designed
to ease the
transition to college for
first-generation
students.
FSU's Center for Academic
Retention and Enhancement,
known as CARE, helps with
financial aid and
has dedicated advisers and other
resources
available for the student's
entire college
career.
SALLY MCRORIE, Provost, Florida
State University:
There are so many needs that
they have that
the typical college student
doesn't have.
APRIL BROWN: Sally McRorie is
FSU's provost.
SALLY MCRORIE: We have students
in this group
who are food-insecure, so we
have had a food
bank, a food pantry. We have
students who
have nowhere to go on break when
the resident
halls are closed down.
APRIL BROWN: That's frequently a
problem for
foster youth like James. When he
decided to
return to Orlando for winter
break, he didn't
know at first where he'd stay.
But then two
families he met last spring at a
fund-raiser
for the Foundation for Foster
Children opened
their doors to him. James spent
his holidays
visiting both.
JAMES TURNER: It's so weird to
be in a family
setting again after being in
group homes for
so long. So, these families that
are opening
up their home to me, they don't
know that
they're serving a great -- they
are doing
something so great.
APRIL BROWN: On our way back to
Tallahassee
and FSU, James shared his most
ambitious plan
yet. He wants to use his
business degree to
reform the state's foster care
system and
hopes to develop an app and a
Web site specifically
for the kids.
JAMES TURNER: That they can
relate and share
their experiences at different
group homes.
They can even rate group homes.
They can rate
caseworkers. They can rate
staff. They can
rate all this stuff. They can
rate their judges.
They can rate their experiences
that they
had in different foster homes
and foster parents,
and talk about how different
caseworkers are
doing different things, making
other people
aware.
APRIL BROWN: But he says, above
all, he wants
to help make sure kids in the
system get one
thing they all need.
JAMES TURNER: Just someone to
care. It's as
simple as that, someone who
cares, at least
one person who cares.
APRIL BROWN: Today, James has
given up on
running competitively, focusing
his free time
instead on speaking to both
large groups...
JAMES TURNER: At age
1-and-a-half, I was entered
into foster care, but didn't
know until the
age of 6.
APRIL BROWN: ... and smaller
ones.
JAMES TURNER: We're already
ahead of the game.
We just got to get there.
APRIL BROWN: Like here at the
Florida United
Methodist Children's Home
outside Orlando.
James never lived in this group
home, but
he offered their foster youth
guidance on
life in college.
JAMES TURNER: You get into
college, and people
have to live with each other.
You hear these
little people, these little
girls and these
guys complaining about their
roommate. And
I was like, dude, I lived in
group homes my
all my life. I had roommates
worse than this.
Like, this is nothing. You know
what I mean?
APRIL BROWN: His story has also
inspired many
at Florida State.
SALLY MCRORIE: These students
deserve our
help. They will be great, just
like James.
They will be great spokespeople.
They will
be movers and shakers in their
future communities.
And all they need is the chance
and a little
bit of help to do that.
APRIL BROWN: That's a sentiment
James couldn't
agree with more.
JAMES TURNER: These kids will be
driven because
they want to make a name for
themselves. You
know, foster care and the group
homes and
foster homes are gold mines for
our nation.
APRIL BROWN: And, at this point
in his life,
James has found a different kind
of forever
family.
JAMES TURNER: Every kid, you
know, that was
in foster care, every kid that
can relate
with what I can relate to, you
know, they
are my family now, and they are
adopted into
me, and I'm adopted into them.
APRIL BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm April
Brown in Florida.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a "NewsHour"
essay.
As we reported earlier,
President Obama today
announced plans to expand drug
treatment centers
and increase the use of drugs
that reverse
the effect of opioids like
heroin, OxyContin
and Percocet.
Communities across the country
are developing
new approaches to this epidemic
in an attempt
to support addicts, helping them
into treatment,
instead of arrests.
New York's Cardozo Law School
Professor Ekow
Yankah compares today's approach
to heroin
users to the tough-on-crime
response a few
decades ago to those using crack
cocaine.
EKOW YANKAH, Professor, Cardozo
School of
Law: That Kroger, the Midwestern
grocery chain,
has decided to make the heroin
overdose drug
naloxone available without a
prescription
is a sign of how ominous the
current epidemic
has grown.
Faced with a rising wave of
addiction, misery,
crime and death, our nation has
linked arms
to save souls. Senators and
CEOs, Midwestern
pharmacies and even
tough-on-crime Republican
presidential candidates now
speak with moving
compassion about the real people
crippled
by addiction.
It wasn't always this way.
Thirty years ago,
America was facing a similar
wave of addiction,
death and crime, and the
response could not
have been more different.
Television brought
us endless images of thin,
black, ravaged
bodies, always with desperate,
dried lips.
We learned the words crack baby.
Back then, when addiction was a
black problem,
there was no wave of national
compassion.
Instead, we were warned of super
predators,
young, faceless black men
wearing bandannas
and sagging jeans.
No matter how far from our lives
crack was,
we're guilty by association. By
the time I
was in college in the early
1990s, my short
dreadlocks meant older women
would cross the
street to avoid me.
African-Americans were cast as
pathological.
Their plight was evidence of
collective moral
failure, of welfare mothers and
rock-slinging
thugs and a reason to cut off
all help. Blacks
would just have to pull
themselves out of
the crack epidemic. Until then,
the only answer
lay in cordoning off the
wreckage with militarized
policing.
Today, police chiefs facing
heroin addiction
are responding not by invoking
war, but by
trying to save lives and get
people into rehab.
Suddenly, crime is understood as
a sign of
underlying addiction, rather
than a scourge
to be eradicated.
One former narcotics officers
said: "These
are people. They have a purpose
in life, and
we can't look at it any other
way."
But he couldn't quite put his
finger on just
what had changed. His words
reflect our collective
self-denial. It is hard to
describe how bittersweet
many African-Americans feel
witnessing this.
Glad to be rid of a failed war
on drugs? Yes,
but also weary and embittered.
When the faces
of addiction had dark skin, the
police didn't
see sons and daughters, sister
and brothers.
They saw brothas, young thugs to
be locked
up, not people with a purpose in
life.
No one laments the violence the
crack bomb
set off more than
African-Americans. But how
we respond to the crimes
accompanying addiction
depends on how much we care
about those affected.
White heroin addicts get
overdose treatment,
rehabilitation and
reincorporation. Black
drug users got jail cells and
just say no.
It would be perverse to want to
go back, and
this is not just about racial
guilt. The hope
is that we really can learn from
our meanest
moments. This stark moment gives
us the opportunity
to quit our dedication to
ignoring racism.
Next time we or even you are
faced with an
indictment of institutionalized
racism, maybe
we can swallow the knee-jerk
dismissal or
the condescending
finger-wagging, and imagine
if you would accept such
treatment of your
own. We don't have to wait until
a problem
has a white face to answer with
humanity.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in tonight on
"Frontline":
a rare look at what life is
really like inside
the Saudi kingdom.
"Saudi Arabia Uncovered" shows
the ruling
regime uses harsh tactics to
quell protests
and goes to great lengths to
prevent any imagery
of dissent from making its way
to the outside
world. "Frontline" airs tonight
on most PBS
stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.